When you've exhausted all other options in the Hierarchy of Controls, Personal Protective Equipment becomes your essential barrier against harm.
But simply wearing PPE is not enough; you must select the right type, ensure it's rated for the hazard, and
know how to inspect and wear it correctly.
Let's cover some of the most critical items for electrical safety.
The most important are insulated gloves.
These are not ordinary work gloves; they are specifically designed and tested to protect you from electric shock up to
a certain voltage.
Always check the voltage rating on the glove and make sure it's higher than the voltage you're working with.
Before each use, you must inspect them for any damage.
A tiny pinhole can be deadly.
A common method is the air-leak test, where you trap air inside the glove to see if any escapes.
For eye and face protection, you'll use safety glasses or, for higher-risk tasks, a face shield.
These protect you from flying debris, sparks, and the intense energy of an arc flash.
Always inspect them for cracks or scratches that could impair your vision.
In environments with overhead hazards, a hard hat is non-negotiable.
It protects your head not only from falling objects but also from accidental contact with overhead electrical lines.
Finally, for tasks with a risk of an arc flash—a type of electrical explosion—you must wear specialized Arc-Rated, or AR,
clothing.
This material is designed to resist catching fire and self-extinguishes, protecting your skin from severe burns.
Remember, regular clothing can actually make an injury worse by melting or burning.
PPE is your personal defense system; maintain it properly.